update-tool-tutorials (#156)
jhudsl/AnVIL_Book_Getting_Started: 06-tools-rstudio.Rmd

# RStudio

One of the analysis platforms available on AnVIL is RStudio. This platform offers rich genomics support through [Bioconductor](https://anvilproject.org/learn/interactive-analysis/getting-started-with-bioconductor). This chapter focuses on launching and highlighting a few features for RStudio.

## RStudio: Video tutorial

Here is a video tutorial that describes the basics of using RStudio on AnVIL.

<iframe src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1v72ZG8JIRDUaewFQgGfcCO_qoM4eYmYX/preview" width="640" height="360" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

### Objectives

- Start compute for your RStudio environment
- Tour RStudio on AnVIL
- Stop compute to minimize expenses

### Slides

The slides for this tutorial are are located [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw).

## RStudio: Step-by-step guide

This step-by-step guide provides written instructions and screenshots for getting started with RStudio on AnVIL.

> Once you have created a Workspace, you can create an RStudio cloud environment. This will allow you to interface with data and perform genomics-based analyses with add on packages from the Bioconductor community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, in order to use RStudio, you must have access to a Terra Workspace with permission to compute (i.e. you must be a "Writer" or "Owner" of the Workspace).  From there, you can create an RStudio cloud environment. This will allow you to interface with data and perform genomics-based analyses with add on packages from the Bioconductor community.
```

### Launch RStudio Cloud Environment

> 1. Click on the name of the Workspace you just created. You should be routed to a link that looks like: `https://anvil.terra.bio/#workspaces/<billing-project>/<workspace-name>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click on the name of your Workspace. You should be routed to a link that looks like: `https://anvil.terra.bio/#workspaces/<billing-project>/<workspace-name>`.
```

1. On the top right, Click the gear icon to access your Cloud Environment options.

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the newly created Workspace. The gear icon to create a new cloud environment is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw/edit#slide=id.gdde5ec9a4d_1_34")
    ```

1. You will see a list of costs because it costs a small amount of money to use cloud computing. Click "CUSTOMIZE".

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the cloud environment popout menu. The "Customize" button is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw/edit#slide=id.gdde5ec9a4d_1_50")
    ```

1. Click on the first drop down menu to see what other software configurations are available.

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the cloud environment popout menu. The first dropdown menu for options, the Application configuration menu, is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw/edit#slide=id.gdde5ec9a4d_1_11")
    ```

> 1. Scroll down and select RStudio from the Community-Maintained RStudio Environments section. **NOTE**: AnVIL is very versatile and can scale up to use very powerful cloud computers. It's very important that you select the cloud computing environment described here to avoid runaway costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Scroll down and select RStudio from the Community-Maintained RStudio Environments section. **NOTE**: AnVIL is very versatile and can scale up to use very powerful cloud computers. It's very important that you select a cloud computing environment appropriate to your needs to avoid runaway costs.  If you are uncertain, start with the default settings; it is fairly easy to increase your compute resources later, if needed, but harder to scale down.
```

    ```

1. Select this file and click "More" > "Export"

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the RStudio interface. A plot has been created. The saved pdf file is now visible under the "Files" pane. The "More" and "Export" menus have been highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BLTCaogA04bbeSD1tR1Wt-mVceQA6FHXa8FmFzIARrg/edit#slide=id.g1204ed6db6a_0_0")
    ```

1. Select "Download" to save the file to your local machine.

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the RStudio interface. The popup to download the selected file has been highlighted,'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BLTCaogA04bbeSD1tR1Wt-mVceQA6FHXa8FmFzIARrg/edit#slide=id.g1204ed6db6a_0_8")
    ```

### Pause RStudio {#stopping}

1. The upper right corner reminds you that you are accruing cloud computing costs.

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the RStudio interface. The icon on the top right showing that the cloud environment is running is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BLTCaogA04bbeSD1tR1Wt-mVceQA6FHXa8FmFzIARrg/edit#slide=id.g11f12bc99af_0_84")
    ```

> 1. You should minimize charges when you are not performing an analysis. You can do this by clicking on “Stop cloud environment”. This will release the CPU and memory resources for other people to use. Note that your work will be saved in the environment and continue to accrue a very small cost. Your instructor can delete these environments to stop costs accruing, so it's a good idea to save code or output somewhere else, such as GitHub or your local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You should minimize charges when you are not performing an analysis. You can do this by clicking on “Stop cloud environment”. This will release the CPU and memory resources for other people to use. Note that your work will be saved in the environment and continue to accrue a very small cost.  This work will be lost if the cloud environment gets deleted.  If there is anything you would like to save permanently, it's a good idea to copy it from your compute environment to another location, such as the Workspace bucket, GitHub, or your local machine, depending on your needs.
```

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the RStudio interface. The stop icon on the top right which stops the cloud environment is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BLTCaogA04bbeSD1tR1Wt-mVceQA6FHXa8FmFzIARrg/edit#slide=id.g11f12bc99af_0_91")
    ```

### Delete RStudio Cloud Environment

> 1. [Stopping](#stopping) your cloud environment only pauses your work. When you are ready to delete the cloud environment, click on the gear icon in the upper right corner to “Update cloud environment”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Stopping your cloud environment only pauses your work. When you are ready to delete the cloud environment, click on the gear icon in the upper right corner to “Update cloud environment”.
```
(removing link to make this easier to borrow without breaking)

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the Workspace page. The gear icon on the top right that updates the cloud environment is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw/edit#slide=id.ge1182913a6_0_41")
    ```

1. Click on “Delete Environment Options”.

    ```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.alt='Screenshot of the cloud environment popout. "Delete environment options" is highlighted.'}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eypYLLqD11-NwHLs4adGpcuSB07dYEJfAaALSMvgzqw/edit#slide=id.ge1182913a6_0_20")
    ```

> 1. If you are certain that you do not need the data and configuration on your disk, you should select "Delete everything, including persistent disk".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you are certain that you do not need the data and configuration on your disk, you should select "Delete everything, including persistent disk".  If there is anything you would like to save, open the compute environment and copy the file(s) from your compute environment to another location, such as the Workspace bucket, GitHub, or your local machine, depending on your needs.
```

# RStudio

One of the analysis platforms available on AnVIL is RStudio. This platform offers rich genomics support through [Bioconductor](https://anvilproject.org/learn/interactive-analysis/getting-started-with-bioconductor). This chapter focuses on launching and highlighting a few features for RStudio.

## RStudio: Video tutorial

```{r, echo = FALSE, results='asis'}
cow::borrow_chapter(
  doc_path = "child/_child_rstudio_video.Rmd",
  repo_name = "jhudsl/AnVIL_Template"
)
```

## RStudio: Step-by-step guide

This step-by-step guide provides written instructions and screenshots for getting started with RStudio on AnVIL.

> Note that, in order to use RStudio, you must have access to a Terra Workspace with permission to compute (i.e. you must be a “Writer” or “Owner” of the Workspace). From there, you can create an RStudio cloud environment. This will allow you to interface with data and perform genomics-based analyses with add on packages from the Bioconductor community.``

Reviewer: This sentence is repeated within the child
